Backup:
Cobian Backup is a multi-threaded program that can be used to schedule and backup your files and directories from their original location to other directories/drives in the same computer or other computer in your network.
AOMEI Backupper More Easier...Safer...Faster Backup & Restore

Communication:
Pidgin is a chat program which lets you log in to accounts on multiple chat networks simultaneously.
TriLLian has great support for many different chat networks, including Facebook, Skype, Google, MSN, AIM, ICQ, XMPP, Yahoo!, and more.
Miranda IM is an open-source multi protocol instant messenger client for Microsoft Windows.

Connection Tools:
PuTTy is a free implementation of Telnet and SSH for Windows and Unix platforms, along with an xterm terminal emulator.
PuTTy-CAC is a free SSH client for Windows that supports smartcard authentication using the US Department of Defense Common Access Card (DoD CAC) as a PKI token.
MobaXterm is an enhanced terminal for Windows with an X11 server, a tabbed SSH client and several other network tools for remote computing (VNC, RDP, telnet, rlogin).
iTerm is a full featured terminal emulation program written for OS X using Cocoa.
mRemoteNG is a fork of mRemote, an open source, tabbed, multi-protocol, remote connections manager.
MicroSoft Remote Desktop Connection Manager RDCMan manages multiple remote desktop connections
RealVNC allows you to access and control your desktop applications wherever you are in the world, whenever you need to.
RD Tabs The Ultimate Remote Desktop Client
TeamViewer Remote control any computer or Mac over the internet within seconds or use TeamViewer for online meetings.

Deployment:
DRBL (Diskless Remote Boot in Linux) is free software, open source solution to managing the deployment of the GNU/Linux operating system across many clients.
YUMI It can be used to create a Multiboot USB Flash Drive containing multiple operating systems, antivirus utilities, disc cloning, diagnostic tools, and more.
Disk2vhd is a utility that creates VHD (Virtual Hard Disk - Microsoft's Virtual Machine disk format) versions of physical disks for use in Microsoft Virtual PC or Microsoft Hyper-V virtual machines (VMs).
FOG is a free open-source cloning/imaging solution/rescue suite. A alt. solution used to image Windows XP, Vista PCs using PXE, PartImage, and a Web GUI to tie it together.
CloneZilla The Free and Open Source Software for Disk Imaging and Cloning

E-mail:
Swithmail Send SSL SMTP email silently from command line (CLI), or a batch file using Exchange, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo!

File Manipulation: TeraCopy is designed to copy and move files at the maximum possible speed.
WinSCP is an open source free SFTP client, SCP client, FTPS client and FTP client for Windows.
7-zip is a file archiver with a high compression ratio.
TrueCrypt is free open-source disk encryption software for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux.
WinDirStat is a disk usage statistics viewer and cleanup tool for various versions of Microsoft Windows.
KDirStat is a graphical disk usage utility, very much like the Unix "du" command. In addition to that, it comes with some cleanup facilities to reclaim disk space.
ProcessExplorer shows you information about which handles and DLLs processes have opened or loaded.
Dropbox is a file hosting service that offers cloud storage, file synchronization, and client software.
TreeSize Free can be started from the context menu of a folder or drive and shows you the size of this folder, including its subfolders. Expand folders in an Explorer-like fashion and see the size of every subfolder
Everything Search Engine Locate files and folders by name instantly.
tftpd32 The TFTP client and server are fully compatible with TFTP option support (tsize, blocksize and timeout), which allow the maximum performance when transferring the data.
filezilla Free FTP solution. Both a client and a server are available.
WizTree finds the files and folders using the most disk space on your hard drive
Bittorrent Sync lets you sync and share files and folders between devices, friends, and coworkers.
RichCopy can copy multiple files at a time with up to 8 times faster speed than the normal file copy and moving process.
Hiren's All in One Bootable CD
Darik's Boot and Nuke Darik's Boot and Nuke (DBAN) is free erasure software designed for consumer use.

Graphics:
IrfanView is a very fast, small, compact and innovative FREEWARE (for non-commercial use) graphic viewer for Windows 9x, ME, NT, 2000, XP, 2003 , 2008, Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8.
Greenshot is a light-weight screenshot software tool for Windows
LightShot The fastest way to do a customizable screenshot
Try Jing for a free and simple way to start sharing images and short videos of your computer screen.
ZoomIt is a screen zoom and annotation tool for technical presentations that include application demonstrations
Paint.NET is free image and photo editing software for PCs that run Windows.

Logging Tools:
Bare Tail A free real-time log file monitoring tool
Logstash is a tool for managing events and logs. You can use it to collect logs, parse them, and store them for later use (like, for searching).
ElasticSearch is a flexible and powerful open source, distributed, real-time search and analytics engine.
Kibana visualize logs and time-stamped data | elasticsearch works seamlessly with kibana to let you see and interact with your data
ElasticSearch Helpful Resource: http://asquera.de/opensource/2012/11/25/elasticsearch-pre-flight-checklist/
Diamond is a python daemon that collects system metrics and publishes them to Graphite (and others).
statsd A network daemon that runs on the Node.js platform and listens for statistics, like counters and timers, sent over UDP and sends aggregates to one or more pluggable backend services
jmxtrans This is effectively the missing connector between speaking to a JVM via JMX on one end and whatever logging / monitoring / graphing package that you can dream up on the other end
Media:
VLC is a free and open source cross-platform multimedia player and framework that plays most multimedia files as well as DVD, Audio CD, VCD, and various streaming protocols.
foobar2000 Supported audio formats: MP3, MP4, AAC, CD Audio, WMA, Vorbis, Opus, FLAC, WavPack, WAV, AIFF, Musepack, Speex, AU, SND... and more

Mobile:
PushBullet makes getting things on and off your phone easy and fast
